---
layout: post
title: Why FOSS?
date: 2016-11-30 14:25
highlight: true
published: true
---


## What is FLOSS?
**F**ree **L**ibre (**O**pen **S**ource) **S**oftware is, [according to Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_software):

> computer software distributed under terms that allow users to run the
  software for any purpose as well as to study, change, and distribute the
  software and any adapted versions.


Since we've talked about the GNU project and R. M. Stallman and L. Torvalds and
what they've done for the community, I'm going to omit all introductions and
cruft about them.

Notice that the question I'm asking is about FLOSS and not FOSS; I will let the
reader figure out why.

From this we deduce the 4 principles of free software, also known as **the Four
Freedoms**:

*   Freedom 0: The freedom to *run* the program for any purpose
*   Freedom 1: The freedom to study how the program works, and change it to
	make it do what you wish.
*   Freedom 2: The freedom to redistribute and make copies so you can help
	others.
*   Freedom 3: The freedom to improve the program, and release your
	improvements (and modified versions in general) to the public, so that the
	whole community benefits.


For a program to be free, it has to allow the user all of these freedoms, some
of which (but never all of them) are offered in commercial or non-commercial
products. The [Free Software Foundation] is the main charity organization that
covers most free software projects.

## Open source software

Free software doesn't have to be open-sourced to the public. The main idea is
that free software can (and should, *should* being a legal obligation,
according to the GNU **G**eneral **P**ublic **L**icense) be shared with
whomever that has access to it and/or its source code as much as the program's
author.

Open source, on the other hand, has a more pragmatic approach. Instead of
sticking to the development of **purely** free software, the [Open Source
Initiative] encourages sharing and collaboration with every entity willing to
help. This movement started in the beginning of this century, with programmers
who felt that the GPL and the other similar licenses prevented proprietary
parts (of code, documentation or other content related to the software) to
coexist with their works in the free software world. The full list of
requirements to be called "open source software" can be found [on the Wikipedia
page].

The open source activist groups and communities worldwide have made what is
often called "the open source way", a set of ideologies based on open sharing,
collaboration and working towards a common goal. Here in Albania we have
OpenLabs, by far the most active group in FLOSS-related activities.

I feel like I must make a clarification here: although most users pay for
proprietary software, freedom 0 is almost never respected nowadays (Microsoft
Windows only gives you a *license to use the software for the aforementioned
use cases* -- taken from the Windows '98 EULA, still the same phrase in Windows
10 installers), and many businesses abuse the term "open source" by offering
software, whose source code is public/easily accessible, but modifying it in
any way is illegal (Microsoft again, with Visual Studio Code)

## The mess that is called intellectual property

By now, you may have created your own opinion on each philosophy. Anyways, to
avoid any possible misunderstanding, I'm going to explain each movement's
approach to licensing and author's rights.

As you know, copyright licenses favor the author(s) and the preservance of
authorship. The author of a copyrighted property (film, music, program, banner)
is the sole owner of said property, and as such governs its use.

Copyleft licenses, such as the GPL (and its derivatives), make sure that
whatever has been licensed under them will always remain free, and that **any
modification, addition or work based on the copyleft (not *copylefted*)
property will also remain free in the sense of freedom**, not as in "free
beer".

And the newer licensing category, *copynone*, makes sure that some of the
author's rights are respected, while at the same time making sure that the
property will remain free (according to the 4 freedoms explained before). These
licenses are called *permissive licenses* and allow use of the licensed content
in any way, usually with the only condition being the preservance of the
property's copyright notice.

The latter category is what brings together the communities in developing free
software and the businesses in growing and competing with companies that follow
strict proprietary policies (smaller businesses that follow such policies are
rare, because of their inefficiency).

## Why bother converting to FOSS?

Note that I am talking about FOSS, without the *libre* part. It is much more
ethical to convert to a FLOSS ecosystem, but the restrictions on proprietary
software bring, together with their moral values, inconsistencies and problems
with cooperating with other services. This is where pure OSS comes in. As
mentioned in the previous paragraphs, open source software can, although it
isn't encouraged to, cooperate and coexist with proprietary software. Most of
today's hardware has some form of lockdown, ranging from public source code
that demands the manufacturer's signature (this is most commonly seen in the
Android ecosystem) to the completely proprietary "blobs", pieces of code that
work in tandem with a piece of hardware, in order to ensure the hardware's
functionality. The same problem rises with drivers, which, for the sake of
simplicity, are put into the same category.

Working with FOSS brings the end user the benefits of:

*   **security** through disclosure: would your homework have less problems if
	you were to give it to half of your friends to proofread (let's take it for
	granted that nobody ever thinks of copying your artwork), than if you only
	gave it to the teacher in the due date?
*   **auditability** since everyone can prove if the software is adhering to
	standards and good practices (a good example of this is the WhatsApp
	end-to-end encryption news: nobody knows if it's implemented, even if it
	is, and yet the company has advertised secure messaging).
*   **quality** for the same reason as above.
*   **freedom** in deciding about the software's future: you can help shape
	that future, even by a tiny little contribution in translating it
*   **customizability** since the source is there and you can do whatever you
	want with it (freedoms 0, 1 and 3).
*   **cost.** Actually, lack thereof. Such software is made to serve the
	people, by the people, for the people. Nobody gets paid for what they do.
*   **support**, which can be paid-for (dedicated), a practice many businesses
	have chosen in order to be profitable while abiding by the FLOSS
	principles, or from the community, in the form of forums, organizations
	(OpenLabs), software groups (Wiki Weekend here in Albania, on 3-4 Dec.
	2016) or simply students helping each other.
*   **no legal liabilities**. For as long as these are community projects,
	nobody can be put to blame, with an exception of the user, who didn't do
	enough previous research on the new software.

## How to convert to FOSS?

### 1. Use a FOSS operating system

For a dekstop OS, take your pick. There are more GNU/Linux distributions than
there are words in this introduction, and I assure you that there are a great
deal many words. For a beginner, I'd recommend something like [Linux Mint] (the
grandma-approved beginner-friendly distro) or [Ubuntu] (both [Debian]-based),
or even [Korora] (a much more user-friendly [Fedora]-based distro). If you want
to get right in to the intricacies of Linux, go for [Arch] or Arch-based OS-s,
such as [Manjaro] or [Antergos]. In the mobile world, Android is the Linux
behemoth. There are ports of Android into the desktop world, making for an
almost complete ecosystem. Android has yet to free itself from the proprietary
drivers and locked bootloaders, though.

### 2. Use FOSS software

This is quite simple. Replace your web browser with a FOSS alternative (which
also happens to follow the FLOSS principles), such as [Mozilla Firefox],
[Chromium] (prebuilt packages can be found in every major distro's
repositories) or [Midori] (for the Safari fans). Choose an office suite:
[LibreOffice] (what I use) or any other that comes with your distribution. Use
a FOSS text editor. Most people do not show particular interest on text
editors, but with some serious tweaking, one can avoid the need of a full
office suite. **Do not use Sublime Text or Visual Studio Code. I am not going
to link to them. You are on your own.**

### 3. Learn to troubleshoot

You'll eventually run into problems or want to customize, but do not know how.
Support is the only thing that costs in the FLOSS world, and you may want to
fix those problems by yourself. It's nobody's obligation to help you in online
forums or Q/A sites.

### 4. RTFM

As the acronym says, read the \[expletive\] manual. Everything might feel new at
first, but nobody's born a genius either, so when you're in doubt, read, then
ask. Some newcomer problems are looked upon with disdain by "veterans", just
like how you don't go about asking strangers on the street how to put your own
clothes in your own closet. Smart questions are valued just as much as smart
answers, and having a decent reputation in a community is quite valuable.

### 5. Get involved

It's true that you don't have to pay a dime to use FOSS software however you
wish, but what kind of good neighbor is one that keeps bugging you with all
sorts of useless information but never bothers to help you, should you need
something (yes, as a complete beginner, you're practically useless, because you
haven't proven what you're worth)? Find what you enjoy doing in this new world,
and keep doing that. Many "word wielders" (what I call people with exceptional
language skills) edit Wikis and documentation for their favorite programs,
others translate, the hobbyists and specialists improve/expand the codebase,
the better speakers spread the FLOSS word and promote it wherever they can.
Yes, I'm harsh, but I want to remind everyone that this is like almost every
other community, where everyone has to behave and noone owes anything to
anyone.

#### The point I want to make

I do not expect to convert any reader to FLOSS with just one article, mainly
because it may seem like non-neglectable leap from the routine, although it's
the right thing to do. FOSS is a fairly achievable goal, especially with
today's convergence and easy access to online resources, and in my opinion, the
*practical* thing to do.



[Free Software Foundation]: https://www.fsf.org
[Open Source Initiative]: https://opensource.org/
[on the Wikipedia page]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Open_Source_Definition
[Linux Mint]: https://www.linuxmint.com
[Ubuntu]: https://www.ubuntu.com
[Debian]: https://www.debian.org
[Korora]: https//www.kororaproject.org
[Fedora]: https://getfedora.org
[Arch]: https://www.archlinux.org
[Manjaro]: https://manjaro.org
[Antergos]: https://antergos.com
[Mozilla Firefox]: https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/products/
[Chromium]: https://www.chromium.org
[Midori]: http://midori-browser.org
[LibreOffice]: https://www.libreoffice.org/
