---
layout: post
title: "Random updates I feel I need to post"
date: 2018-02-14 20:51
categories: life
excerpt: "Read if you can't kill time in any other way"
---

So, now I'm a CTO, possibly in addition to simultaneously being a CEO in the near future as things are going, have a singing lightning-thrower to build, my laptop's screen is bugging me with a big bright spot right in the middle, and I have an essay to write, but that's fine, because I'm fine. I even started listening to the Ender's Saga this week. Life is good. It feels as if this is more of a diary of mine to keep me in check rather than a place to share interesting stuff, but as all y'all might have figured out, I need this. I can't even look at my handwriting and some of you may know it, so a diary would be digital-only, just so I could be able to read it at a later date.

I've received a bunch of emails about RSS problems and decided to try my site out with `newsboat`, and I can safely assume it's a failure everywhere. Many other posts from Jekyll users confirm this, so Jekyll is pretty much out of the question for the self-hosted piece I'm building. I'm sorry for setting this aside, but I have more pressing issues at hand. `elinks` and `w3m` work fine for normal CLI browsing, so there's a decent workaround. Don't expect me to churn out daily (or even weekly) articles.

As for the Nextcloud tutorial, the draft has remained untouched from sometime around December and will remain that way up until May, to say the least. Send me an email if you want help. I'll find some time to spare while throwing random links your way. I promise there will be much more fun stuff after this school year's end, no matter where I get accepted. I'm currently thinking of making a CLI journey for beginners and some nifty old software advertising here and there, a la [Inconsolation], but I would quickly run out: Vim is my workplace, from mail and notes and vi-style browsing to writing and webdevving. Finishing the SSTC's code with a code generator with MIDI files as input would be a great pastime indeed, right after we document everything and remain sane despite any unplanned contact with the arcs. I've been looking forward to making a mechanical keyboard, too, something like [Dactyl] or [Redox].

I think I'll explain some dotfiles next time. For the next four months or so, this blog will be more of a venting box for me and barely anything else. Until then, cheers!

------

**Edit:** After a considerable meditation session in the meditation room on the meditation box, I think I'll just explain the dots in the repo's README and cut it short. I'll be working on the coil during the next few months, while logging whatever I do with the website of what we're trying to start up. It runs on [Wagtail] and this choice is only made so that I can spend more time ~~biting my nails in frustration~~ getting used to Django. There's not much to be done in the way of site design, though.


[Inconsolation]: http://inconsolation.wordpress.com/
[Dactyl]: https://github.com/adereth/dactyl-keyboard/
[Redox]: https://www.reddit.com/r/MechanicalKeyboards/comments/7iu8bc/p_i_made_a_thing/
[Wagtail]: https://wagtail.io/

