---
layout: post
title: NixOS
categories: tech
---

Cool little thing, this distro. It's like you're baking a bootable ISO every
time you upgrade, but other than that, it's awesome. Maybe even the upgrade
part is doing me a favor: Arch updates are more of a `moon-buggy`-esque pastime
than system-wide changes. Maybe I needed a switch. Anyhow, these months after
school I decided to go (almost) full NixOS. The VM worked fine, the 32 bit
build didn't, so I couldn't test it on my old laptop. Still, the fact that such
an "underground" (not my words) distribution actually has 32 bit builds
surprised me.

Something with compiling Firefox's Spidermonkey and then something about not
having enough memory (swap enabled) for the nix daemon during big package
compilations, ~~which seems to be on the works for the next release~~
[currently fixed](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/36799), prevented me
from doing proper performance testing, as is custom for 2006-era laptops.
I then overwrote the whole Arch partition and the install went quite smoothly
(maybe the lack of LVM/LUKS helped, maybe not).

The first cool thing about NixOS is the configuration file: every difference in
the system is defined on a single file, every package, every different compile
option, every running service, every partition, bootloader and kernel option.
From there, the Nix package manager also packages the configuration files for
all other programs in a separate "package" (these are called derivations and
have a .drv extension). After editing the configuration file, all you need to
do is run `nixos-rebuild switch [--upgrade]` and all changes will take effect
either immediately or after a reboot (say, bootloader configs), after updating
all non-fixed packages (you can specify which package versions you want and
this is perfect for production machines and multiuser systems, where some users
might need different software versions).

The second (and most important) cool thing one will notice is the nix language.
Every built package has been created following the same declarative language,
including the system configuration (`/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`) and the
per-user configurations (via
[`home-manager`](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Home_Manager)). I wanted to get my
toes wet with Haskell when it comes to functional programming, but it seems
I had to learn some in order to user NixOS.

Third, this kind of specification allows for scary orchestration and
customization. Ansible, Saltstack and the like all go out the window, as the
system just *is*, there is no point in using imperative forms and shuffling
files in various locations (although there is a way to order a package
install). Entire folders of shell scripts and Makefiles can be safely thrown
out, since one could just edit either the expression directly from the store,
or add/customize an attribute/option via `packageOverrides`. We have to come
back to the previous part of system rewrites and point out that the /etc folder
is also often nuked (especially boot files). If you want to keep
a configuration, store it in /etc/static and symlink to the proper place **in
/etc only**. The filesystem tree is very different: each package is stored in
/nix/store/<hash>-<package name> and the respective derivation has a .drv at
the end. This also means that inside each package there might be a bunch of
./lib or ./usr subdirectories with documentation and service files and whatnot

Nix, on the other hand, is a different beast. It not only expects to be the
only package manager in the system in the case of NixOS, but actually enforces
this (installing Python packages via `pip` or gems via `gem` is pointless as
you won't be able to run them without much hassle). On the other hand, it can
also coexist with other package managers, say DNF or APT, if installed on
a distro different from NixOS. It can also change that distro *into* NixOS if
you want. All this seemingly pointless fluff, although quite useful for quick
migrations, requires Nix to take a different approach to packaging: if
a derivation identifiable by its hash isn't found on the public cache
(something like a big public repo), then it is *transparently* built following
the appropriate nix expression. This makes Nix something between Arch's ABS/AUR
and Gentoo's (together with all the BSDs) port(age) trees, but *betterer*.

I've tried to write an expression for
[terminal_velocity](https://github.com/seanh/terminal_velocity), but it seems
I'm in too deep and will have a go with user environments instead.
