# Stories

> cue Hive Queen quote

What's been bugging me the whole two weeks I've been here is the way almost all 30+ year olds seem to socialize: tell stories, bullshit your way between stories from each side of the discussion, rinse and repeat until either gets bored or something needs to be done.

We seem to make stories for everything, even when trying to make a point and numbers are much more effective. All school textbooks on humanities and a scary amount of essays I've come across try to convey the importance of their message (not the message itself, mind you) through a hypothetical family or business story. Why would I care about what happens to whomever has an alcohol problem but doesn't exist in the first place? What's so important about your 24 year old daughter who's now unemployed because call centers get shut down and spring back up like mushrooms? We're in one of the most remote parts of this forest and few ever come around, but when they do, they come sixteen strong, armed to the teeth with small talk subjects and laser-focused to get you to climb back into the womb to find some quiet.

We could even toss someone in a room with all sorts of widgets and a ceiling light, and tell them the light turns on whenever they do "the right thing" (or the left thing, whatever they may be), while there is absolutely no switch in any of the objects in the room and no instruction in any sheet of paper for anyone out of the room. The thing is when the dog in front of the button thinks it's time to mash it. I have a hunch people would still try to repeat whatever they did the first time the light turns on, with plenty of variations to choose from. Every mind is trying to make sense of chaos, and yes, while oftentimes intuition is pretty useful (the "if you feel you're in danger, then you're in danger" adage) and sometimes refined enough to benefit us more than stopping and thinking, it's all a bunch of marketing-grade AI: only event tables where it picks up the probability of threat or reward.

This is a story. Huh. Nice. So we're bound to make connections between independent events, and all this web weaving serves some kind of purpose? I hope it's not about killing time, at least.
